1. Suppose a family contains two children of different ages, and we are interested in the
gender of these children. Let F denote that a child is female and M that the child is
male and let a pair such as FM denote that the older child is female and the younger is
male. There are four points in the set S of possible observations:
S = {FF, FM, MF, MM}.
Let A denote the subset of possibilities containing no males; B, the subset containing two
males; and C, the subset containing at least one male. List the elements of 𝐴, 𝐵, 𝐶, 𝐴 ∩
𝐵, 𝐴 ∪ 𝐵, 𝐴 ∩ 𝐶, 𝐴 ∪ 𝐶, 𝐵 ∩ 𝐶, 𝐵 ∪ 𝐶, 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝐶 ∩ 𝐵
 

2. Draw Venn diagrams to verify DeMorgan’s laws. That is, for any two sets A and B,
(𝐴 ∪ 𝐵) = 𝐴̅ ∩ 𝐵 and (𝐴 ∩ 𝐵) = 𝐴̅ ∪ 𝐵.
 

3. Use the identities A = A ∩ S and S = B ∪ 𝐵 and a distributive law to prove that
a. A = (A ∩ B) ∪ (A ∩ 𝐵).
b. If B ⊂ A then A = B ∪ (A ∩ 𝐵).
c. Further, show that (A ∩ B) and (A ∩ 𝐵) are mutually exclusive and therefore that A is
the union of two mutually exclusive sets, (A ∩ B) and (A ∩ 𝐵).
d. Also show that B and (A ∩ 𝐵) are mutually exclusive and if B ⊂ A, A is the union of
two mutually exclusive sets, B and (A ∩ 𝐵).
 

4. A group of five applicants for a pair of identical jobs consists of three men and two
women. The employer is to select two of the five applicants for the jobs. Let S denote
the set of all possible outcomes for the employer’s selection. Let A denote the subset
of outcomes corresponding to the selection of two men and B the subset corresponding
to the selection of at least one woman. List the outcomes in 𝐴, 𝐵, 𝐴 ∪ 𝐵, 𝐴 ∩
𝐵, 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝐴 ∩ 𝐵. (Denote the different man and women by M1, M2, M3 and W1, W2,
respectively.)
 

5. A manufacturer has five seemingly identical computer terminals available for
shipping. Unknown to her, two of the five are defective. A particular order calls for
two of the terminals and is filled by randomly selecting two of the five that are
available.
a. List the sample space for this experiment.
b. Let A denote the event that the order is filled with two nondefective terminals. List the
sample points in A.
c. Construct a Venn diagram for the experiment that illustrates event A.
d. Assign probabilities to the simple events in such a way that the information about the
experiment is used and the axioms in Definition 2.6 are met.
e. Find the probability of event A.


6. Every person’s blood type is A, B, AB, or O. In addition, each individual either has
the Rhesus (Rh) factor (+) or does not (−). A medical technician records a person’s
blood type and Rh factor. List the sample space for this experiment.
 

7. A sample space consists of five simple events, E1, E2, E3, E4, and E5.
a. If 𝑃(𝐸1) = 𝑃(𝐸2) = 0.15, 𝑃(𝐸3) = 0.4, 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑃(𝐸4) = 2𝑃(𝐸5),

find

the

probabilities of E4 and E5.
b. If 𝑃(𝐸1) = 3𝑃(𝐸2) = 0.3, find the probabilities of the remaining simple events if
you know that the remaining simple events are equally probable.
 

8. Americans can be quite suspicious, especially when it comes to government
conspiracies. On the question of whether the U.S. Air Force has withheld proof of the
existence of intelligent life on other planets, the proportions of Americans with
varying opinions are given in the table.

Suppose that one American is selected and his or her opinion is recorded.
a. What are the simple events for this experiment?
b. Are the simple events that you gave in part (a) all equally likely? If not, what are the
probabilities that should be assigned to each?

c. What is the probability that the person selected finds it at least somewhat likely that
the Air Force is withholding information about intelligent life on other planets?
 

9. An oil prospecting firm hits oil or gas on 10% of its drillings. If the firm drills two
wells, the four possible simple events and three of their associated probabilities are as
given in the accompanying table. Find the probability that the company will hit oil or
gas
a. on the first drilling and miss on the second.
b. on at least one of the two drillings.

 

10. Hydraulic landing assemblies coming from an aircraft rework facility are each
inspected for defects. Historical records indicate that 8% have defects in shafts only,
6% have defects in bushings only, and2%have defects in both shafts and bushings.
One of the hydraulic assemblies is selected randomly. What is the probability that the
assembly has
a. a bushing defect?
b. a shaft or bushing defect?
c. exactly one of the two types of defects?
d. neither type of defect?

 

11. A business office orders paper supplies from one of three vendors, V1, V2, or V3.
Orders are to be placed on two successive days, one order per day. Thus, (V2, V3)
might denote that vendor V2 gets the order on the first day and vendor V3 gets the
order on the second day.
a. List the sample points in this experiment of ordering paper on two successive days.
b. Assume the vendors are selected at random each day and assign a probability to each
sample point.
c. Let A denote the event that the same vendor gets both orders and B the event that V2
gets at least one order. Find 𝑃(𝐴), 𝑃(𝐵), 𝑃(𝐴 ∪ 𝐵), and 𝑃(𝐴 ∩ 𝐵) by summing the
probabilities of the sample points in these events.
 

12. Consider the problem of selecting two applicants for a job out of a group of five and
imagine that the applicants vary in competence, 1 being the best, 2 second best, and so
on, for 3, 4, and 5. These ratings are of course unknown to the employer. Define two
events A and B as:
A: The employer selects the best and one of the two poorest applicants (applicants 1 and
4 or 1 and 5).
B: The employer selects at least one of the two best.
Find the probabilities of these events.

 
The experiment involves randomly selecting two applicants out of five. Denote the selection
of applicants 3 and 5 by {3, 5}. 2. The ten simple events, with {i, j } denoting the selection of
applicants i and j , are
E1 : {1, 2}, E5 : {2, 3}, E8 : {3, 4}, E10 : {4, 5}.
E2 : {1, 3}, E6 : {2, 4}, E9 : {3, 5},
E3 : {1, 4}, E7 : {2, 5},
E4 : {1, 5},
A random selection of two out of five gives each pair an equal chance for selection. Hence,
we will assign each sample point the probability 1/10. That is,
𝑃(𝐸𝑖 ) = 1/10 = .1, 𝑖 = 1, 2, . . . , 10.
Checking the sample points, we see that B occurs whenever 𝐸1, 𝐸2, 𝐸3, 𝐸4, 𝐸5, 𝐸6, 𝑜𝑟 𝐸7
occurs. Hence, these sample points are included in B. Finally, P(B) is equal to the sum of the
probabilities of the sample points in B, or

Similarly, we see that event 𝐴 = 𝐸3 ∪ 𝐸4 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑡ℎ𝑎𝑡 𝑃(𝐴) = .1 + .1 = .2.
13. A balanced coin is tossed three times. Calculate the probability that exactly two of the
three tosses result in heads.
 
The experiment consists of observing the outcomes (heads or tails) for each of three tosses of
a coin. A simple event for this experiment can be symbolized by a three-letter sequence of H’s
and T ’s, representing heads and tails, respectively. The first letter in the sequence represents
the observation on the first coin. The second letter represents the observation on the second
coin, and so on.The eight simple events in S are

E1 : HHH, E2 : HHT, E3 : HT H, E4 : T HH, E5 : HTT, E6 : T HT, E7 : TT H, E8 : TTT.
Because the coin is balanced, we would expect the simple events to be equally likely; that is,
𝑃(𝐸𝑖 ) = 1/8, 𝑖 = 1, 2, . . . , 8. The event of interest, A, is the event that exactly two of the
tosses result in heads. An examination of the sample points will verify that 𝐴 = {𝐸2, 𝐸3, 𝐸4}.
Finally, 𝑃(𝐴) = 𝑃(𝐸2) + 𝑃(𝐸3) + 𝑃(𝐸4) = 1/8 + 1/8 + 1/8 = 3/8.
14. The odds are two to one that, when A and B play tennis, A wins. Suppose that A and
B play two matches. What is the probability that A wins at least one match?

15. A single car is randomly selected from among all of those registered at a local tag
agency. What do you think of the following claim? “All cars are either Volkswagens
or they are not. Therefore, the probability is 1/2 that the car selected is a Volkswagen.”
 

16. Two additional jurors are needed to complete a jury for a criminal trial. There are six
prospective jurors, two women and four men. Two jurors are randomly selected from
the six available.
a. Define the experiment and describe one sample point. Assume that you need describe
only the two jurors chosen and not the order in which they were selected.
b. List the sample space associated with this experiment.
c. What is the probability that both of the jurors selected are women?
 

17. The Bureau of the Census reports that the median family income for all families in the
United States during the year 2003 was $43,318. That is, half of all American families
had incomes exceeding this amount, and half had incomes equal to or below this
amount. Suppose that four families are surveyed and that each one reveals whether its
income exceeded $43,318 in 2003.
a. List the points in the sample space.
b. Identify the simple events in each of the following events:
A: At least two had incomes exceeding $43,318.
B: Exactly two had incomes exceeding $43,318.
C: Exactly one had income less than or equal to $43,318.
c. Make use of the given interpretation for the median to assign probabilities to the
simple events and find P(A), P(B), and P(C).

 

18. A boxcar contains six complex electronic systems. Two of the six are to be randomly
selected for thorough testing and then classified as defective or not defective.
a. If two of the six systems are actually defective, find the probability that at least one of
the two systems tested will be defective. Find the probability that both are defective.
b. If four of the six systems are actually defective, find the probabilities indicated in part
(a).
 

19. The names of 3 employees are to be randomly drawn, without replacement, from a
bowl containing the names of 30 employees of a small company. The person whose
name is drawn first receives $100, and the individuals whose names are drawn second
and third receive $50 and $25, respectively. How many sample points are associated
with this experiment?

 
Because the prizes awarded are different, the number of sample points is the number of
ordered arrangements of r = 3 out of the possible n = 30 names. Thus, the number of sample
points in S is

20. Suppose that an assembly operation in a manufacturing plant involves four steps,
which can be performed in any sequence. If the manufacturer wishes to compare the
assembly time for each of the sequences, how many different sequences will be
involved in the experiment?


21. A labor dispute has arisen concerning the distribution of 20 laborers to four different
construction jobs. The first job (considered to be very undesirable) required 6 laborers;
the second, third, and fourth utilized 4, 5, and 5 laborers, respectively. The dispute
arose over an alleged random distribution of the laborers to the jobs that placed all 4
members of a particular ethnic group on job 1. In considering whether the assignment
represented injustice, a mediation panel desired the probability of the observed event.
Determine the number of sample points in the sample space S for this experiment.
That is, determine the number of ways the 20 laborers can be divided into groups of
the appropriate sizes to fill all of the jobs. Find the probability of the observed event if
it is assumed that the laborers are randomly assigned to jobs.
22. An airline has six flights from New York to California and seven flights from
California to Hawaii per day. If the flights are to be made on separate days, how many
different flight arrangements can the airline offer from New York to Hawaii?
 

23. A businesswoman in Philadelphia is preparing an itinerary for a visit to six major
cities. The distance traveled, and hence the cost of the trip, will depend on the order in
which she plans her route.
a. How many different itineraries (and trip costs) are possible?
b. If the businesswoman randomly selects one of the possible itineraries and Denver and
San Francisco are two of the cities that she plans to visit, what is the probability that
she will visit Denver before San Francisco?
 

24. An experiment consists of tossing a pair of dice.
a. Use the combinatorial theorems to determine the number of sample points in the
sample space S.
b. Find the probability that the sum of the numbers appearing on the dice is equal to 7.
 

25. How many different seven-digit telephone numbers can be formed if the first digit
cannot be zero?
 

26. A fleet of nine taxis is to be dispatched to three airports in such a way that three go to
airport A, five go to airport B, and one goes to airport C. In how many distinct ways
can this be accomplished?
 

27. Students attending the University of Florida can select from 130 major areas of study.
A student’s major is identified in the registrar’s records with a two-or three-letter code
(for example, statistics majors are identified by STA, math majors by MS). Some
students opt for a double major and complete the requirements for both of the major
areas before graduation. The registrar was asked to consider assigning these double
majors a distinct two- or three-letter code so that they could be identified through the
student records’ system.
a. What is the maximum number of possible double majors available to University of
Florida students?
b. If any two- or three-letter code is available to identify majors or double majors, how
many major codes are available?
c. How many major codes are required to identify students who have either a single
major or a double major?
d. Are there enough major codes available to identify all single and double majors at the
University of Florida?
 

28. A local fraternity is conducting a raffle where 50 tickets are to be sold—one per
customer. There are three prizes to be awarded. If the four organizers of the raffle each
buy one ticket, what is the probability that the four organizers win
a. all of the prizes?
b. exactly two of the prizes?
c. exactly one of the prizes?
d. none of the prizes?
 

29. Five firms, F1, F2, . . . , F5, each offer bids on three separate contracts, C1,C2, and C3.
Any one firm will be awarded at most one contract. The contracts are quite different,
so an assignment of C1 to F1, say, is to be distinguished from an assignment of C2 to
F1.
a. How many sample points are there altogether in this experiment involving assignment
of contracts to the firms? (No need to list them all.)
b. Under the assumption of equally likely sample points, find the probability that F3 is
awarded a contract.

 

30. A study is to be conducted in a hospital to determine the attitudes of nurses toward
various administrative procedures. A sample of 10 nurses is to be selected from a total
of the 90 nurses employed by the hospital.
a. How many different samples of 10 nurses can be selected?
b. Twenty of the 90 nurses are male. If 10 nurses are randomly selected from those
employed by the hospital, what is the probability that the sample of ten will include
exactly 4 male (and 6 female) nurses?
 

31. Two cards are drawn from a standard 52-card playing deck. What is the probability
that the draw will yield an ace and a face card?
 

32. Five cards are dealt from a standard 52-card deck. What is the probability that we
draw
a. 1 ace, 1 two, 1 three, 1 four, and 1 five (this is one way to get a “straight”)?
b. any straight?

 

33. Suppose that we ask n randomly selected people whether they share your birthday.
a. Give an expression for the probability that no one shares your birthday (ignore leap
years).
b. How many people do we need to select so that the probability is at least .5 that at least
one shares your birthday?
 

34. The eight-member Human Relations Advisory Board of Gainesville, Florida,
considered the complaint of a woman who claimed discrimination, based on sex, on
the part of a local company. The board, composed of fivewomen and three men, voted
5–3 in favor of the plaintiff, the five women voting in favor of the plaintiff, the three
men against. The attorney representing the company appealed the board’s decision by
claiming sex bias on the part of the board members. If there was no sex bias among
the board members, it might be reasonable to conjecture that any group of five board
members would be as likely to vote for the complainant as any other group of five. If
this were the case, what is the probability that the vote would split along sex lines (five
women for, three men against)?
 

35. Consider the following events in the toss of a single die: A: Observe an odd number,
B: Observe an even number, C: Observe a 1 or 2.
a. Are A and B independent events?
b. Are A and C independent events?
 
a. To decide whether A and B are independent, we must see whether they satisfy the
conditions of Definition 2.10. In this example, P(A) = 1/2, P(B) = 1/2, and P(C) = 1/3.
Because A ∩ B = ∅, P(A|B) = 0, and it is clear that P(A|B) = P(A). Events A and B are
dependent events.
b. Are A and C independent? Note that P(A|C) = 1/2 and, as before, P(A) = 1/2.
Therefore, P(A|C) = P(A), and A and C are independent.
36. Three brands of coffee, X, Y , and Z, are to be ranked according to taste by a judge.
Define the following events:
A: Brand X is preferred to Y .
B: Brand X is ranked best.
C: Brand X is ranked second best.
D: Brand X is ranked third best.
If the judge actually has no taste preference and randomly assigns ranks to the brands, is event
A independent of events B, C, and D?
 
The six equally likely sample points for this experiment are given by
𝐸1 ∶ 𝑋𝑌 𝑍, 𝐸3 ∶ 𝑌 𝑋𝑍, 𝐸5 ∶ 𝑍𝑋𝑌,
𝐸2 ∶ 𝑋𝑍𝑌, 𝐸4 ∶ 𝑌 𝑍𝑋, 𝐸6 ∶ 𝑍𝑌 𝑋,
where XY Z denotes that X is ranked best, Y is second best, and Z is last. Then 𝐴 =
{𝐸1, 𝐸2, 𝐸5}, 𝐵 = {𝐸1, 𝐸2}, 𝐶 = {𝐸3, 𝐸5}, 𝐷 = {𝐸4, 𝐸6}, and it follows that
𝑃(𝐴) = 1/2, 𝑃(𝐴|𝐵) = 𝑃(𝐴 ∩ 𝐵)
𝑃(𝐵) = 1, 𝑃(𝐴|𝐶) = 1/2, 𝑃(𝐴|𝐷) = 0.

Thus, events A and C are independent, but events A and B are dependent. Events A and D are
also dependent.
37. If two events, A and B, are such that 𝑃(𝐴) = .5, 𝑃 (𝐵) = .3, and 𝑃(𝐴 ∩ 𝐵) = .1, find
the following:

P(A|B)
P(B|A)
P(A|A ∪ B)
P(A|A ∩ B)
P(A ∩ B|A ∪ B)

 

38. Gregor Mendel was a monk who, in 1865, suggested a theory of inheritance based on
the science of genetics. He identified heterozygous individuals for flower color that
had two alleles (one r = recessive white color allele and one R = dominant red color
allele). When these individuals were mated, 3/4 of the offspring were observed to have
red flowers, and 1/4 had white flowers. The following table summarizes this mating;
each parent gives one of its alleles to form the gene of the offspring.

We assume that each parent is equally likely to give either of the two alleles and that, if either
one or two of the alleles in a pair is dominant (R), the offspring will have red flowers. What is
the probability that an offspring has
a. at least one dominant allele?
b. at least one recessive allele?
c. one recessive allele, given that the offspring has red flowers?

 

39. Cards are dealt, one at a time, from a standard 52-card deck.
a. If the first 2 cards are both spades, what is the probability that the next 3 cards are also
spades?
b. If the first 3 cards are all spades, what is the probability that the next 2 cards are also
spades?
c. If the first 4 cards are all spades, what is the probability that the next card is also a
spade?
 

40. A study of the posttreatment behavior of a large number of drug abusers suggests that
the likelihood of conviction within a two-year period after treatment may depend upon
the offenders education. The proportions of the total number of cases falling in four
education–conviction categories are shown in the following table:

Suppose that a single offender is selected from the treatment program. Define the
events: A: The offender has 10 or more years of education. B: The offender is convicted
within two years after completion of treatment. Find the following:
a. P(A).
b. P(B).
c. P(A ∩ B).
d. P(A ∪ B).

e. 𝑃(𝐴̅).
f. P(𝐴 ∪ 𝐵).
g. P(𝐴 ∩ 𝐵).
h. P(A|B).
i. P(B|A).
 

41. Suppose that A and B are mutually exclusive events, with P(A) > 0 and P(B) < 1. Are
A and B independent? Prove your answer.
 

42. If A and B are mutually exclusive events and P(B) > 0, show that

 

43. If A and B are independent events, show that A and 𝐵 are also independent. Are 𝐴̅ and
𝐵 independent?
 

44. Suppose that A and B are two events such that P(A) + P(B) > 1.
a. What is the smallest possible value for P(A ∩ B)?
b. What is the largest possible value for P(A ∩ B)?
 

45. Suppose that A and B are two events such that P(A) + P(B) < 1.
a. What is the smallest possible value for P(A ∩ B)?
b. What is the largest possible value for P(A ∩ B)?

 

46. Can A and B be mutually exclusive if P(A) = .4 and P(B) = .7? If P(A) = .4 and P(B) =
.3? Why?
 

47. Two events A and B are such that P(A) = .2, P(B) = .3, and P(A ∪ B) = .4. Find the
following:
a. P(A ∩ B)
b. P(𝐴̅ ∪ 𝐵)
c. P(𝐴̅ ∩ 𝐵)
d. P(𝐴̅ |B)
 

48. In a game, a participant is given three attempts to hit a ball. On each try, she either
scores a hit, H, or a miss, M. The game requires that the player must alternate which
hand she uses in successive attempts. That is, if she makes her first attempt with her
right hand, she must use her left hand for the second attempt and her right hand for the
third. Her chance of scoring a hit with her right hand is .7 and with her left hand is .4.
Assume that the results of successive attempts are independent and that she wins the
game if she scores at least two hits in a row. If she makes her first attempt with her
right hand, what is the probability that she wins the game?

 

49. Consider the following portion of an electric circuit with three relays. Current will
flow from point a to point b if there is at least one closed path when the relays are
activated. The relays may malfunction and not close when activated. Suppose that the
relays act independently of one another and close properly when activated, with a
probability of .9.

a. What is the probability that current will flow when the relays are activated?
b. Given that current flowed when the relays were activated, what is the probability that
relay 1 functioned?
 

50. Articles coming through an inspection line are visually inspected by two successive
inspectors. When a defective article comes through the inspection line, the probability
that it gets by the first inspector is 0.1. The second inspector will “miss” five out of ten
of the defective items that get past the first inspector. What is the probability that a
defective item gets by both inspectors?
 

51. It is known that a patient with a disease will respond to treatment with probability
equal to 0.9. If three patients with the disease are treated and respond independently,
find the probability that at least one will respond.

52. A monkey is to demonstrate that she recognizes colors by tossing one red, one black,
and one white ball into boxes of the same respective colors, one ball to a box. If the
monkey has not learned the colors and merely tosses one ball into each box at random,
find the probabilities of the following results:
a. There are no color matches.
b. There is exactly one color match.
53. An advertising agency notices that approximately 1 in 50 potential buyers of a product
sees a given magazine ad, and 1 in 5 sees a corresponding ad on television. One in 100
sees both. One in 3 actually purchases the product after seeing the ad, 1 in 10 without
seeing it. What is the probability that a randomly selected potential customer will
purchase the product?
 

54. A state auto-inspection station has two inspection teams. Team 1 is lenient and passes
all automobiles of a recent vintage; team 2 rejects all autos on a first inspection
because their “headlights are not properly adjusted.” Four unsuspecting drivers take
their autos to the station for inspection on four different days and randomly select one
of the two teams.
a. If all four cars are new and in excellent condition, what is the probability that three of
the four will be rejected?
b. What is the probability that all four will pass?
 

55. A football team has a probability of .75 of winning when playing any of the other four
teams in its conference. If the games are independent, what is the probability the team
wins all its conference games?
 

56. Suppose that two balanced dice are tossed repeatedly and the sum of the two
uppermost faces is determined on each toss. What is the probability that we obtain
a. a sum of 3 before we obtain a sum of 7?
b. a sum of 4 before we obtain a sum of 7?
 

57. A new secretary has been given n computer passwords, only one of which will permit
access to a computer file. Because the secretary has no idea which password is correct,
he chooses one of the passwords at random and tries it. If the password is incorrect, he
discards it and randomly selects another password from among those remaining,
proceeding in this manner until he finds the correct password.
a. What is the probability that he obtains the correct password on the first try?
b. What is the probability that he obtains the correct password on the second try? The
third try?
c. A security system has been set up so that if three incorrect passwords are tried before
the correct one, the computer file is locked and access to it denied. If n = 7, what is the
probability that the secretary will gain access to the file?

 

58. An electronic fuse is produced by five production lines in a manufacturing operation.
The fuses are costly, are quite reliable, and are shipped to suppliers in 100-unit lots.
Because testing is destructive, most buyers of the fuses test only a small number of
fuses before deciding to accept or reject lots of incoming fuses. All five production
lines produce fuses at the same rate and normally produce only 2% defective fuses,
which are dispersed randomly in the output. Unfortunately, production line 1 suffered
mechanical difficulty and produced 5% defectives during the month of March. This
situation became known to the manufacturer after the fuses had been shipped. A
customer received a lot produced in March and tested three fuses. One failed.
a. What is the probability that the lot was produced on line 1?
b. What is the probability that the lot came from one of the four other lines?

59. A diagnostic test for a disease is such that it (correctly) detects the disease in 90% of
the individuals who actually have the disease. Also, if a person does not have the
disease, the test will report that he or she does not have it with probability .9. Only 1%
of the population has the disease in question. If a person is chosen at random from the
population and the diagnostic test indicates that she has the disease, what is the
conditional probability that she does, in fact, have the disease? Are you surprised by
the answer? Would you call this diagnostic test reliable?
 

60. Males and females are observed to react differently to a given set of circumstances. It
has been observed that 70% of the females react positively to these circumstances,
whereas only 40% of males react positively. A group of 20 people, 15 female and 5
male, was subjected to these circumstances, and the subjects were asked to describe

their reactions on a written questionnaire. A response picked at random from the 20
was negative. What is the probability that it was that of a male?
 

61. A student answers a multiple-choice examination question that offers four possible
answers. Suppose the probability that the student knows the answer to the question is
.8 and the probability that the student will guess is .2. Assume that if the student
guesses, the probability of selecting the correct answer is .25. If the student correctly
answers a question, what is the probability that the student really knew the correct
answer?
 

62. Of the travelers arriving at a small airport, 60% fly on major airlines, 30% fly on
privately owned planes, and the remainder fly on commercially owned planes not
belonging to a major airline. Of those traveling on major airlines, 50% are traveling
for business reasons, whereas 60% of those arriving on private planes and 90% of
those arriving on other commercially owned planes are traveling for business reasons.
Suppose that we randomly select one person arriving at this airport. What is the
probability that the person
a. is traveling on business?
b. is traveling for business on a privately owned plane?
c. arrived on a privately owned plane, given that the person is traveling for business
reasons?
d. is traveling on business, given that the person is flying on a commercially owned
plane?

 

63. Five identical bowls are labeled 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5. Bowl i contains i white and 5 − i
black balls, with i = 1, 2, . . . , 5. A bowl is randomly selected and two balls are
randomly selected (without replacement) from the contents of the bowl.
a. What is the probability that both balls selected are white?
b. Given that both balls selected are white, what is the probability that bowl 3 was
selected?
 

64. Define an experiment as tossing two coins and observing the results. Let Y equal the
number of heads obtained.
a. Identify the sample points in S, assign a value of Y to each sample point, and
identify the sample points associated with each value of the random variable Y .
b.

Compute the probabilities for each value of Y.


65. A supervisor in a manufacturing plant has three men and three women working for
him. He wants to choose two workers for a special job. Not wishing to show any
biases in his selection, he decides to select the two workers at random. Let Y denote
the number of women in his selection. Find the probability distribution for Y.
 

66. When the health department tested private wells in a county for two impurities
commonly found in drinking water, it found that 20% of the wells had neither
impurity, 40% had impurity A, and 50% had impurity B. (Obviously, some had both
impurities.) If a well is randomly chosen from those in the county, find the probability
distribution for Y , the number of impurities found in the well.
 

67. A group of four components is known to contain two defectives. An inspector tests the
components one at a time until the two defectives are located. Once she locates the
two defectives, she stops testing, but the second defective is tested to ensure accuracy.
Let Y denote the number of the test on which the second defective is found. Find the
probability distribution for Y.
 

68. A problem in a test given to small children asks them to match each of three pictures
of animals to the word identifying that animal. If a child assigns the three words at
random to the three pictures, find the probability distribution for Y , the number of
correct matches.
 

69. Each of three balls are randomly placed into one of three bowls. Find the probability
distribution for Y = the number of empty bowls.
 

70. In order to verify the accuracy of their financial accounts, companies use auditors on a
regular basis to verify accounting entries. The company’s employees make erroneous
entries 5% of the time. Suppose that an auditor randomly checks three entries.

a. Find the probability distribution for Y , the number of errors detected by the auditor.
b. Construct a probability histogram for p(y).
c. Find the probability that the auditor will detect more than one error.
 

71. Persons entering a blood bank are such that 1 in 3 have type O+ blood and 1 in 15
have type O− blood. Consider three randomly selected donors for the blood bank. Let
X denote the number of donors with type O+ blood and Y denote the number with
type O− blood. Find the probability distributions for X and Y . Also find the
probability distribution for X + Y , the number of donors who have type O blood.
 

72. The probability distribution for a random variable Y is given in table. Find the mean,
variance, and standard deviation of Y .

 

73. The manager of an industrial plant is planning to buy a new machine of either type A
or type B. If t denotes the number of hours of daily operation, the number of daily
repairs Y1 required to maintain a machine of type A is a random variable with mean
and variance both equal to .10t. The number of daily repairs Y2 for a machine of type
B is a random variable with mean and variance both equal to .12t. The daily cost of
operating A is CA(t) = 10t + 30Y12 ; for B it is CB(t) = 8t + 30Y22. Assume that the
repairs take negligible time and that each night the machines are tuned so that they
operate essentially like new machines at the start of the next day. Which machine
minimizes the expected daily cost if a workday consists of (a) 10 hours and (b) 20
hours?

 

74. An insurance company issues a one-year $1000 policy insuring against an occurrence
A that historically happens to 2 out of every 100 owners of the policy. Administrative
fees are $15 per policy and are not part of the company’s “profit.” How much should
the company charge for the policy if it requires that the expected profit per policy be
$50? [Hint: If C is the premium for the policy, the company’s “profit” is C−15 if A
does not occur and C−15−1000 if A does occur.]
 

75. Who is the king of late night TV? An Internet survey estimates that, when given a
choice between David Letterman and Jay Leno, 52% of the population prefers to
watch Jay Leno. Three late night TV watchers are randomly selected and asked which
of the two talk show hosts they prefer.
a. Find the probability distribution for Y, the number of viewers in the sample who
prefer Leno.
b. Construct a probability histogram for p(y).
c. What is the probability that exactly one of the three viewers prefers Leno?
d. What are the mean and standard deviation for Y?
e. What is the probability that the number of viewers favoring Leno falls within 2
standard deviations of the mean?
 

76. In a gambling game a person draws a single card from an ordinary 52-card playing
deck. A person is paid $15 for drawing a jack or a queen and $5 for drawing a king or
an ace. A person who draws any other card pays $4. If a person plays this game, what
is the expected gain?
 

77. Two construction contracts are to be randomly assigned to one or more of three firms:
I, II, and III. Any firm may receive both contracts. If each contract will yield a profit
of $90,000 for the firm, find the expected profit for firm I. If firms I and II are actually
owned by the same individual, what is the owner’s expected total profit?
 

78. A potential customer for an $85,000 fire insurance policy possesses a home in an area
that, according to experience, may sustain a total loss in a given year with probability
of .001 and a 50% loss with probability .01. Ignoring all other partial losses, what
premium should the insurance company charge for a yearly policy in order to break
even on all $85,000 policies in this area?
 

79. Suppose that Y is a discrete random variable with mean μ and variance σ 2 and let W =
2Y.
a. Do you expect the mean of W to be larger than, smaller than, or equal to μ=E(Y)?
Why?
b. Express E(W) = E(2Y ) in terms of μ = E(Y ). Does this result agree with your answer
to part (a)?
c. Recalling that the variance is a measure of spread or dispersion, do you expect the
variance of W to be larger than, smaller than, or equal to σ 2 = V(Y )? Why?

d. Use the result in part (b) to show that V(W) = E{[W − E(W)]2} = E[4(Y − μ)2] = 4σ2;
that is, W = 2Y has variance four times that of Y .
 

80. Let Y be a discrete random variable with mean μ and variance σ2. If a and b are
constants, prove that,
a. E(aY + b) = aE(Y ) + b = aμ + b.
b. V(aY + b) = a2V(Y ) = a2σ2.
 

81. Consider the population of voters described in Example 3.6. Suppose that there are N
= 5000 voters in the population, 40% of whom favor Jones. Identify the event favors
Jones as a success S. It is evident that the probability of S on trial 1 is .40. Consider
the event B that S occurs on the second trial. Then B can occur two ways: The first
two trials are both successes or the first trial is a failure and the second is a success.
Show that P(B) = .4. What is P(B| the first trial is S)? Does this conditional probability
differ markedly from P(B)?
 

82. In 2003, the average combined SAT score (math and verbal) for college-bound
students in the United States was 1026. Suppose that approximately 45% of all high
school graduates took this test and that 100 high school graduates are randomly
selected from among all high school grads in the United States. Which of the
following random variables has a distribution that can be approximated by a binomial
distribution? Whenever possible, give the values for n and p.
a. The number of students who took the SAT
b. The scores of the 100 students in the sample
c. The number of students in the sample who scored above average on the SAT
d. The amount of time required by each student to complete the SAT
e. The number of female high school grads in the sample
 

83. A complex electronic system is built with a certain number of backup components in
its subsystems. One subsystem has four identical components, each with a probability
of .2 of failing in less than 1000 hours. The subsystem will operate if any two of the
four components are operating. Assume that the components operate independently.
Find the probability that
a. exactly two of the four components last longer than 1000 hours.
b. the subsystem operates longer than 1000 hours.
 

84. A multiple-choice examination has 15 questions, each with five possible answers, only
one of which is correct. Suppose that one of the students who takes the examination
answers each of the questions with an independent random guess. What is the
probability that he answers at least ten questions correctly?

 

85. Many utility companies promote energy conservation by offering discount rates to
consumers who keep their energy usage below certain established subsidy standards.
A recent EPA report notes that 70% of the island residents of Puerto Rico have
reduced their electricity usage sufficiently to qualify for discounted rates. If five
residential subscribers are randomly selected from San Juan, Puerto Rico, find the
probability of each of the following events:
a. All five qualify for the favorable rates.
b. At least four qualify for the favorable rates.
 

86. A fire-detection device utilizes three temperature-sensitive cells acting independently
of each other in such a manner that any one or more may activate the alarm. Each cell
possesses a probability of p = .8 of activating the alarm when the temperature reaches
100◦ Celsius or more. Let Y equal the number of cells activating the alarm when the
temperature reaches 100◦.
a. Find the probability distribution for Y .
b. Find the probability that the alarm will function when the temperature reaches 100◦.
 

87. Tay-Sachs disease is a genetic disorder that is usually fatal in young children. If both
parents are carriers of the disease, the probability that their offspring will develop the
disease is approximately .25. Suppose that a husband and wife are both carriers and
that they have three children. If the outcomes of the three pregnancies are mutually
independent, what are the probabilities of the following events?
a. All three children develop Tay-Sachs.
b. Only one child develops Tay-Sachs.
c. The third child develops Tay-Sachs, given that the first two did not.
 

88. In the 18th century, the Chevalier de Mere asked Blaise Pascal to compare the
probabilities of two events. Below, you will compute the probability of the two events
that, prior to contrary gambling experience, were thought by de Mere to be equally
likely.
a. What is the probability of obtaining at least one 6 in four rolls of a fair die?
b. If a pair of fair dice is tossed 24 times, what is the probability of at least one double
six?
 

89. A manufacturer of floor wax has developed two new brands, A and B, which she
wishes to subject to homeowners’ evaluation to determine which of the two is
superior. Both waxes, A and B, are applied to floor surfaces in each of 15 homes.

Assume that there is actually no difference in the quality of the brands. What is the
probability that ten or more homeowners would state a preference for
a. brand A?
b. either brand A or brand B?
 

90. Suppose that Y is a binomial random variable with n > 2 trials and success probability
p. Use the technique presented in Theorem 3.7 and the fact that
E{Y (Y −1)(Y −2)} = E(Y3)− 3E(Y 2) + 2E(Y ) to derive E(Y 3).
 

91. Ten motors are packaged for sale in a certain warehouse. The motors sell for $100
each, but a double-your-money-back guarantee is in effect for any defectives the
purchaser may receive. Find the expected net gain for the seller if the probability of
any one motor being defective is .08. (Assume that the quality of any one motor is
independent of that of the others.)
 

92. Of the volunteers donating blood in a clinic, 80% have the Rhesus (Rh) factor present
in their blood.
a. If five volunteers are randomly selected, what is the probability that at least one does
not have the Rh factor?
b. If five volunteers are randomly selected, what is the probability that at most four have
the Rh factor?
c. What is the smallest number of volunteers who must be selected if we want to be at
least 90% certain that we obtain at least five donors with the Rh factor?
 

93. Suppose that the probability of engine malfunction during any one-hour period is p =
.02. Find the probability that a given engine will survive two hours.
 

94. If the probability of engine malfunction during any one-hour period is p = .02 and Y
denotes the number of one-hour intervals until the first malfunction, find the mean and
standard deviation of Y .
 

95. Suppose that 30% of the applicants for a certain industrial job possess advanced
training in computer programming. Applicants are interviewed sequentially and are
selected at random from the pool. Find the probability that the first applicant with
advanced training in programming is found on the fifth interview.
 

96. About six months into GeorgeW. Bush’s second term as president, a Gallup poll
indicated that a near record (low) level of 41% of adults expressed “a great deal” or
“quite a lot” of confidence in the U.S. Supreme Court Suppose that you conducted
your own telephone survey at that time and randomly called people and asked them to
describe their level of confidence in the Supreme Court. Find the probability
distribution for Y , the number of calls until the first person is found who does not
express “a great deal” or “quite a lot” of confidence in the U.S. Supreme Court.
 

97. Let Y denote a geometric random variable with probability of success p.
a. Show that for a positive integer a, P(Y > a) = qa .
b. Show that for positive integers a and b, P(Y > a + b|Y > a) = qb = P(Y > b).
This result implies that, for example, P(Y > 7|Y > 2) = P(Y > 5). Why do you think this
property is called the memoryless property of the geometric distribution?
c. In the development of the distribution of the geometric random variable, we assumed
that the experiment consisted of conducting identical and independent trials until the
first success was observed. In light of these assumptions, why is the result in part (b)
“obvious”?
 

98. A certified public accountant (CPA) has found that nine of ten company audits contain
substantial errors. If the CPA audits a series of company accounts, what is the
probability that the first account containing substantial errors
a. is the third one to be audited?
b. will occur on or after the third audited account?
 

99. The probability of a customer arrival at a grocery service counter in any one second is
equal to .1. Assume that customers arrive in a random stream and hence that an arrival
in any one second is independent of all others. Find the probability that the first arrival
a. will occur during the third one-second interval.
b. will not occur until at least the third one-second interval.

 

100. How many times would you expect to toss a balanced coin in order to obtain the first
head?
 

101.

In responding to a survey question on a sensitive topic (such as “Have you ever

tried marijuana?”), many people prefer not to respond in the affirmative. Suppose that
80% of the population have not tried marijuana and all of those individuals will
truthfully answer no to your question. The remaining 20% of the population have tried
marijuana and 70% of those individuals will lie. Derive the probability distribution of
Y , the number of people you would need to question in order to obtain a single
affirmative response.
 

102.

A geological study indicates that an exploratory oil well drilled in a particular

region should strike oil with probability .2. Find the probability that the third oil strike
comes on the fifth well drilled.
 

103.

A large stockpile of used pumps contains 20% that are in need of repair. A

maintenance worker is sent to the stockpile with three repair kits. She selects pumps at
random and tests them one at a time. If the pump works, she sets it aside for future
use. However, if the pump does not work, she uses one of her repair kits on it.
Suppose that it takes 10 minutes to test a pump that is in working condition and 30
minutes to test and repair a pump that does not work. Find the mean and variance of
the total time it takes the maintenance worker to use her three repair kits.
 

104.

A geological study indicates that an exploratory oil well should strike oil with

probability .2.
a. What is the probability that the first strike comes on the third well drilled?
b. What is the probability that the third strike comes on the seventh well drilled?
c. What assumptions did you make to obtain the answers to parts (a) and (b)?
d. Find the mean and variance of the number of wells that must be drilled if the company
wants to set up three producing wells.

 

105.

The employees of a firm that manufactures insulation are being tested for

indications of asbestos in their lungs. The firm is requested to send three employees
who have positive indications of asbestos on to a medical center for further testing. If
each test costs $20, find the expected value and variance of the total cost of
conducting the tests necessary to locate the three positives.
 

106.

Ten percent of the engines manufactured on an assembly line are defective.

What is the probability that the third nondefective engine will be found
a. on the fifth trial?
b. on or before the fifth trial?
c. Given that the first two engines tested were defective, what is the probability that at
least two more engines must be tested before the first nondefective is found?
d. Find the mean and variance of the number of the trial on which a the first nondefective
engine is found.
e. Find the mean and variance of the number of the trial on which the third nondefective
engine is found.
 

c.

107.

In a sequence of independent identical trials with two possible outcomes on

each trial, S and F, and with P(S) = p, what is the probability that exactly y trials will
occur before the r th success?
 

108.

An important problem encountered by personnel directors and others faced

with the selection of the best in a finite set of elements is exemplified by the following
scenario. From a group of 20 Ph.D. engineers, 10 are randomly selected for
employment. What is the probability that the 10 selected include all the 5 best
engineers in the group of 20?



109.

An industrial product is shipped in lots of 20. Testing to determine whether an

item is defective is costly, and hence the manufacturer samples his production rather
than using a 100% inspection plan. A sampling plan, constructed to minimize the
number of defectives shipped to customers, calls for sampling five items from each lot
and rejecting the lot if more than one defective is observed. (If the lot is rejected, each
item in it is later tested.) If a lot contains four defectives, what is the probability that it
will be rejected? What is the expected number of defectives in the sample of size 5?
What is the variance of the number of defectives in the sample of size 5?

 

110.

A warehouse contains ten printing machines, four of which are defective. A

company selects five of the machines at random, thinking all are in working condition.
What is the probability that all five of the machines are nondefective?
 

111.

In southern California, a growing number of individuals pursuing teaching

credentials are choosing paid internships over traditional student teaching programs. A
group of eight candidates for three local teaching positions consisted of five who had
enrolled in paid internships and three who enrolled in traditional student teaching
programs. All eight candidates appear to be equally qualified, so three are randomly
selected to fill the open positions. Let Y be the number of internship trained candidates
who are hired.
a. Does Y have a binomial or hypergeometric distribution? Why?
b. Find the probability that two or more internship trained candidates are hired.
c. What are the mean and standard deviation of Y?

 

112.

Seed are often treated with fungicides to protect them in poor draining, wet

environments. A small-scale trial, involving five treated and five untreated seeds, was
conducted prior to a large-scale experiment to explore how much fungicide to apply.
The seeds were planted in wet soil, and the number of emerging plants were counted.
If the   was not effective and four plants actually sprouted, what is the
probability that
a. all four plants emerged from treated seeds?
b. three or fewer emerged from treated seeds?
c. at least one emerged from untreated seeds?
 

113.

A group of six software packages available to solve a linear programming

problem has been ranked from 1 to 6 (best to worst). An engineering firm, unaware of
the rankings, randomly selected and then purchased two of the packages. Let Y denote
the number of packages purchased by the firm that are ranked 3, 4, 5, or 6. Give the
probability distribution for Y.
 

114.

Specifications call for a thermistor to test out at between 9000 and 10,000

ohms at 25◦ Celcius. Ten thermistors are available, and three of these are to be
selected for use. Let Y denote the number among the three that do not conform to
specifications. Find the probability distributions for Y (in tabular form) under the
following conditions:
a. Two thermistors do not conform to specifications among the ten that are available.
b. Four thermistors do not conform to specifications among the ten that are available.
 

115.

A jury of 6 persons was selected from a group of 20 potential jurors, of whom

8 were African American and 12 were white. The jury was supposedly randomly
selected, but it contained only 1 African American member. Do you have any reason
to doubt the randomness of the selection?
 

116.

Suppose that a radio contains six transistors, two of which are defective. Three

transistors are selected at random, removed from the radio, and inspected. Let Y equal
the number of defectives observed, where Y = 0, 1, or 2. Find the probability
distribution for Y.
 

117.

In an assembly-line production of industrial robots, gearbox assemblies can be

installed in one minute each if holes have been properly drilled in the boxes and in ten
minutes if the holes must be redrilled. Twenty gearboxes are in stock, 2 with
improperly drilled holes. Five gearboxes must be selected from the 20 that are
available for installation in the next five robots.
a. Find the probability that all 5 gearboxes will fit properly.
b. Find the mean, variance, and standard deviation of the time it takes to install these 5
gearboxes.
 

118.

Cards are dealt at random and without replacement from a standard 52 card

deck. What is the probability that the second king is dealt on the fifth card?
 

119.

Show that the probabilities assigned by the Poisson probability distribution

satisfy the requirements that 0 ≤ p(y) ≤ 1 for all y and ∑ p(y) = 1
 

120.

Suppose that a random system of police patrol is devised so that a patrol officer

may visit a given beat location Y = 0, 1, 2, 3, . . . times per half-hour period, with each
location being visited an average of once per time period. Assume that Y possesses,
approximately, a Poisson probability distribution. Calculate the probability that the
patrol officer will miss a given location during a half-hour period. What is the
probability that it will be visited once? Twice? At least once?
 

121.

A certain type of tree has seedlings randomly dispersed in a large area, with the

mean density of seedlings being approximately five per square yard. If a forester
randomly locates ten 1-square-yard sampling regions in the area, find the probability
that none of the regions will contain seedlings.
 

122.

Industrial accidents occur according to a Poisson process with an average of

three accidents per month. During the last two months, ten accidents occurred. Does
this number seem highly improbable if the mean number of accidents per month, μ, is
still equal to 3? Does it indicate an increase in the mean number of accidents per
month?
 

123.

Let Y denote a random variable that has a Poisson distribution with mean λ =

2. Find
a. P(Y = 4).
b. P(Y ≥ 4).
c. P(Y < 4).
d. P(Y ≥ 4|Y ≥ 2).
 

124.

The random variable Y has a Poisson distribution and is such that p(0) = p(1).

What is p(2)?
 

125.

Customers arrive at a checkout counter in a department store according to a

Poisson distribution at an average of seven per hour. If it takes approximately ten
minutes to serve each customer, find the mean and variance of the total service time
for customers arriving during a 1-hour period. (Assume that a sufficient number of
servers are available so that no customer must wait for service.) Is it likely that the
total service time will exceed 2.5 hours?
 

126.

The number of typing errors made by a typist has a Poisson distribution with an

average of four errors per page. If more than four errors appear on a given page, the
typist must retype the whole page. What is the probability that a randomly selected
page does not need to be retyped?
 

127.

The number of knots in a particular type of wood has a Poisson distribution

with an average of 1.5 knots in 10 cubic feet of the wood. Find the probability that a
10-cubic-foot block of the wood has at most 1 knot.
 

128.

Assume that the tunnel in Exercise 3.132 is observed during ten two-minute

intervals, thus giving ten independent observations 𝑌1, 𝑌2, . . . , 𝑌10, on the Poisson
random variable. Find the probability that Y > 3 during at least one of the ten twominute intervals.
 

129.

A salesperson has found that the probability of a sale on a single contact is

approximately .03. If the salesperson contacts 100 prospects, what is the approximate
probability of making at least one sale?
 

130.

The probability that a mouse inoculated with a serum will contract a certain

disease is .2. Using the Poisson approximation, find the probability that at most 3 of
30 inoculated mice will contract the disease.
 

131.

In the daily production of a certain kind of rope, the number of defects per foot

Y is assumed to have a Poisson distribution with mean λ = 2. The profit per foot when
the rope is sold is given by X, where X = 50 − 2Y − Y 2. Find the expected profit per
foot.
 

132.

A food manufacturer uses an extruder (a machine that produces bite-size

cookies and snack food) that yields revenue for the firm at a rate of $200 per hour
when in operation. However, the extruder breaks down an average of two times every
day it operates. If Y denotes the number of breakdowns per day, the daily revenue
generated by the machine is R = 1600−50Y 2. Find the expected daily revenue for the
extruder.
 

133.

The number of customers per day at a sales counter, Y , has been observed for

a long period of time and found to have mean 20 and standard deviation 2. The
probability distribution of Y is not known. What can be said about the probability that,
tomorrow, Y will be greater than 16 but less than 24?
 

134.

Let Y be a random variable with mean 11 and variance 9. Using Tchebysheff’s

theorem, find
a. a lower bound for P(6 < Y < 16).
b. the value of C such that P(|Y − 11| ≥ C) ≤ .09.
 

135.

This exercise demonstrates that, in general, the results provided by

Tchebysheff’s theorem cannot be improved upon. Let Y be a random variable such
that
𝑝(−1) = 1/18 , 𝑝(0) = 16/ 18 , 𝑝(1) = 1/18
a. Show that E(Y ) = 0 and V(Y ) = 1/9.
b. Use the probability distribution of Y to calculate P(|Y − μ| ≥ 3σ). Compare this exact
probability with the upper bound provided by Tchebysheff’s theorem to see that the
bound provided by Tchebysheff’s theorem is actually attained when k = 3.
 

136.

For a certain type of soil the number of wireworms per cubic foot has a mean

of 100. Assuming a Poisson distribution of wireworms, give an interval that will
include at least 5/9 of the sample values of wireworm counts obtained from a large
number of 1-cubic-foot samples.
 

137.

A balanced coin is tossed three times. Let Y equal the number of heads

observed.
a. Use the formula for the binomial probability distribution to calculate the probabilities
associated with Y = 0, 1, 2, and 3.
b. Construct a probability distribution similar to the one in Table 3.1.
c. Find the expected value and standard deviation of Y , using the formulas E(Y ) = np
and V(Y ) = npq.

d. Using the probability distribution from part (b), find the fraction of the population
measurements lying within 1 standard deviation of the mean. Repeat for 2 standard
deviations.
e. How do your results compare with the results of Tchebysheff’s theorem and the
empirical rule?
 

138.

In May 2005, Tony Blair was elected to an historic third term as the British

prime

minister.

A

Gallop

U.K.

poll

(http://gallup.com/poll/content/default.aspx?ci=1710, June 28, 2005) conducted after
Blair’s election indicated that only 32% of British adults would like to see their son or
daughter grows up to become prime minister. If the same proportion of Americans
would prefer that their son or daughter grow up to be president and 120 American
adults are interviewed,
a. what is the expected number of Americans who would prefer their child grow up to be
president?
b. what is the standard deviation of the number Y who would prefer that their child grow
up to be president?
c. is it likely that the number of Americans who prefer that their child grow up to be
president exceeds 40?

 

139.

For a certain section of a pine forest, the number of diseased trees per acre, Y ,

has a Poisson distribution with mean λ = 10. The diseased trees are sprayed with an
insecticide at a cost of $3 per tree, plus a fixed overhead cost for equipment rental of
$50. Letting C denote the total spraying cost for a randomly selected acre, find the
expected value and standard deviation for C. Within what interval would you expect C
to lie with probability at least .75?
 


140.

Let Y be a continuous random variable with probability density function given

by

Find F(y). Graph both f (y) and F(y).
 

141.

Given 𝑓 (𝑦) = 𝑐𝑦 , 0 ≤ 𝑦 ≤ 2, and 𝑓 (𝑦) = 0 elsewhere, find the value of

𝑐 for which 𝑓 (𝑦) is a valid density function.
 

142.

Let Y be a random variable with p(y) given in the table below.

a. Give the distribution function, F(y). Be sure to specify the value of F(y) for all y,
−∞ <y < ∞.
b. Sketch the distribution function given in part (a).
 

b.

143.

Suppose that Y is a random variable that takes on only integer values 1, 2, . . .

and has distribution function F(y). Show that the probability function p(y) = P(Y = y)
is given by

 

144.

A random variable Y has the following distribution function:

a. Is Y a continuous or discrete random variable? Why?
b. What values of Y are assigned positive probabilities?
c. Find the probability function for Y.
d. What is the median, φ.5, of Y ?
 

145.

Suppose that Y possesses the density function

a. Find the value of c that makes f (y) a probability density function.
b. Find F(y).
c. Graph f (y) and F(y).
d. Use F(y) to find P(1 ≤ Y ≤ 2).
e. Use f (y) and geometry to find P(1 ≤ Y ≤ 2).
 

c.

146.

A supplier of kerosene has a 150-gallon tank that is filled at the beginning of

each week. His weekly demand shows a relative frequency behavior that increases
steadily up to 100 gallons and then levels off between 100 and 150 gallons. If Y
denotes weekly demand in hundreds of gallons, the relative frequency of demand can
be modeled by

a. Find F(y).
b. Find P(0 ≤ Y ≤ .5).
c. Find P(.5 ≤ Y ≤ 1.2).
 

Let the distribution function of a random variable Y be

147.

a.

Find the density function of Y .

b.

Find P(1 ≤ Y ≤ 3).

c.

Find P(Y ≥ 1.5).

d.

Find P(Y ≥ 1|Y ≤ 3).

 

148.

Suppose that Y has density function

find the mean and variance of Y .
 

149.

If Y has distribution function,

find the mean and variance of Y .
 

150.

For certain ore samples, the proportion Y of impurities per sample is a random

variable with density function given by,

The dollar value of each sample is W = 5−0.5Y . Find the mean and variance of W.

 

151.

The temperature Y at which a thermostatically controlled switch turns on has

probability density function given by

Find E(Y) and V(Y).
 

152.

The pH of water samples from a specific lake is a random variable Y with

probability density function given by

a. Find E(Y) and V(Y ).
b. Find an interval shorter than (5, 7) in which at least three-fourths of the pH
measurements must lie.
c. Would you expect to see a pH measurement below 5.5 very often? Why?

 

153.

Daily total solar radiation for a specified location in Florida in October has

probability density function given by

with measurements in hundreds of calories. Find the expected daily solar radiation for
October.
 

154.

If Y is a continuous random variable such that E[(Y −a) 2] < ∞ for all a, show

that E[(Y −a)2] is minimized when a = E(Y).
[Hint: E[(Y − a)2] = E({[Y − E(Y )] + [E(Y ) − a]}2).]
 

155.

Arrivals of customers at a checkout counter follow a Poisson distribution. It is

known that, during a given 30-minute period, one customer arrived at the counter.
Find the probability that the customer arrived during the last 5 minutes of the 30minute period.
 

156.

If a parachutist lands at a random point on a line between markers A and B,

find the probability that she is closer to A than to B. Find the probability that her
distance to A is more than three times her distance to B.
 

157.

A random variable Y has a uniform distribution over the interval (θ1, θ2).

Derive the variance of Y .
 

158.

A circle of radius r has area A = πr 2. If a random circle has a radius that is

uniformly distributed on the interval (0, 1), what are the mean and variance of the area
of the circle?
 

159.

Upon studying

low

bids

for

shipping

contracts,

a microcomputer

manufacturing company finds that intrastate contracts have low bids that are uniformly
distributed between 20 and 25, in units of thousands of dollars. Find the probability
that the low bid on the next intrastate shipping contract
a. is below $22,000.
b. is in excess of $24,000.
 

160.

The failure of a circuit board interrupts work that utilizes a computing system

until a new board is delivered. The delivery time, Y , is uniformly distributed on the
interval one to five days. The cost of a board failure and interruption includes the fixed
cost c0 of a new board and a cost that increases proportionally to Y2. If C is the cost
incurred,

C = c0 + c1Y2.

a. Find the probability that the delivery time exceeds two days.
b. In terms of c0 and c1, find the expected cost associated with a single failed circuit
board.

 

161.

A telephone call arrived at a switchboard at random within a one-minute

interval. The switch board was fully busy for 15 seconds into this one-minute period.
What is the probability that the call arrived when the switchboard was not fully busy?
 

162.

The cycle time for trucks hauling concrete to a highway construction site is

uniformly distributed over the interval 50 to 70 minutes. What is the probability that
the cycle time exceeds 65 minutes if it is known that the cycle time exceeds 55
minutes?
 

163.

The number of defective circuit boards coming off a soldering machine follows

a Poisson distribution. During a specific eight-hour day, one defective circuit board
was found.
a. Find the probability that it was produced during the first hour of operation during that
day.
b. Find the probability that it was produced during the last hour of operation during that
day.
c. Given that no defective circuit boards were produced during the first four hours of
operation, find the probability that the defective board was manufactured during the
fifth hour.

 

164.

Let Z denote a normal random variable with mean 0 and standard deviation 1.

a. Find P(Z > 2).
b. Find P(−2 ≤ Z ≤ 2).
c. Find P(0 ≤ Z ≤ 1.73).
 

165.

The achievement scores for a college entrance examination are normally

distributed with mean 75 and standard deviation 10. What fraction of the scores lies
between 80 and 90?
 

166.

If Z is a standard normal random variable, find the value z0 such that

a. P(Z > z0) = .5.
b. P(Z < z0) = .8643.
c. P(−z0 < Z < z0) = .90.
d. P(−z0 < Z < z0) = .99.
 

167.

What is the median of a normally distributed random variable with mean μ and

standard deviation σ?
 

168.

A company that manufactures and bottles apple juice uses a machine that

automatically fills 16-ounce bottles. There is some variation, however, in the amounts
of liquid dispensed into the bottles that are filled. The amount dispensed has been
observed to be approximately normally distributed with mean 16 ounces and standard
deviation 1 ounce. determine the proportion of bottles that will have more than 17
ounces dispensed into them.
 

169.

The weekly amount of money spent on maintenance and repairs by a company

was observed, over a long period of time, to be approximately normally distributed
with mean $400 and standard deviation $20. How much should be budgeted for
weekly repairs and maintenance to provide that the probability the budgeted amount
will be exceeded in a given week is only .1?
 

170.

A machining operation produces bearings with diameters that are normally

distributed with mean 3.0005 inches and standard deviation .0010 inch. Specifications
require the bearing diameters to lie in the interval 3.000±.0020 inches. Those outside
the interval are considered scrap and must be remachined. What should the mean
diameter be in order that the fraction of bearings scrapped be minimized?
 

171.

The grade point averages (GPAs) of a large population of college students are

approximately normally distributed with mean 2.4 and standard deviation .8. If
students possessing a GPA less than 1.9 are dropped from college, what percentage of
the students will be dropped?
 

172.

Wires manufactured for use in a computer system are specified to have

resistances between .12 and .14 ohms. The actual measured resistances of the wires
produced by company A have a normal probability distribution with mean .13 ohm
and standard deviation .005 ohm.
a. What is the probability that a randomly selected wire from company A’s production
will meet the specifications?
b. If four of these wires are used in each computer system and all are selected from
company A, what is the probability that all four in a randomly selected system will
meet the specifications?
 

173.

The width of bolts of fabric is normally distributed with mean 950 mm

(millimeters) and standard deviation 10 mm.
a. What is the probability that a randomly chosen bolt has a width of between 947 and
958mm?
b. What is the appropriate value for C such that a randomly chosen bolt has a width less
than C with probability .8531?
 

174.

A soft-drink machine can be regulated so that it discharges an average of μ

ounces per cup. If the ounces of fill are normally distributed with standard deviation
0.3 ounce, give the setting for μ so that 8-ounce cups will overflow only 1% of the
time.
 

175.

The SAT and ACT college entrance exams are taken by thousands of students

each year. The mathematics portions of each of these exams produce scores that are
approximately normally distributed. In recent years, SAT mathematics exam scores
have averaged 480 with standard deviation 100. The average and standard deviation
for ACT mathematics scores are 18 and 6,respectively.
a. An engineering school sets 550 as the minimum SAT math score for new students.
What percentage of students will score below 550 in a typical year?
b. What score should the engineering school set as a comparable standard on the ACT
math test?
 

176.

Show that the normal density with parameters μ and σ has inflection points at

the values μ−σ and μ + σ. (Recall that an inflection point is a point where the curve
changes direction from concave up to concave down, or vice versa, and occurs when
the second derivative change sign. Such a change in sign may occur when the second
derivative equals zero.)

 

177.

a. If α > 0, Γ(α) is defined by Γ (α) =∫ y

e

dy show that Γ (1) = 1.

b. If α > 1, integrate by parts to prove that Γ (α) = (α − 1) Γ (α − 1).
 

178.

The operator of a pumping station has observed that demand for water during

early afternoon hours has an approximately exponential distribution with mean 100 cfs
(cubic feet per second).
a. Find the probability that the demand will exceed 200 cfs during the early afternoon on
a randomly selected day.
b. What water-pumping capacity should the station maintain during early afternoons so
that the probability that demand will exceed capacity on a randomly selected day is
only .01?
 

179.

If Y has an exponential distribution and P(Y > 2) = .0821, what is

a. β = E(Y)?
b. P(Y ≤ 1.7)?
 

180.

Historical evidence indicates that times between fatal accidents on scheduled

American domestic passenger flights have an approximately exponential distribution.
Assume that the mean time between accidents is 44 days.
a. If one of the accidents occurred on July 1 of a randomly selected year in the study
period, what is the probability that another accident occurred that same month?
b. What is the variance of the times between accidents?
 

181.

A manufacturing plant uses a specific bulk product. The amount of product

used in one day can be modeled by an exponential distribution with β = 4
(measurements in tons). Find the probability that the plant will use more than 4 tons
on a given day.
 

182.

The magnitude of earthquakes recorded in a region of North America can be

modeled as having an exponential distribution with mean 2.4, as measured on the
Richter scale. Suppose that the magnitude of earthquakes striking the region has a
gamma distribution with α = .8 and β = 2.4.
a. What is the mean magnitude of earthquakes striking the region?
b. What is the probability that the magnitude an earthquake striking the region will
exceed 3.0 on the Richter scale?
c. Compare your answers to Exercise 4.88(a). Which probability is larger? Explain.
d. What is the probability that an earthquake striking the regions will fall between 2.0
and 3.0 on the Richter scale?
 

183.

Explosive devices used in mining operations produce nearly circular craters

when detonated. The radii of these craters are exponentially distributed with mean 10
feet. Find the mean and variance of the areas produced by these explosive devices.
 

184.

Four-week summer rainfall totals in a section of the Midwest United States

have approximately a gamma distribution with α = 1.6 and β = 2.0.
a. Find the mean and variance of the four-week rainfall totals.
b. What is the probability that the four-week rainfall total exceeds 4 inches?
 

185.

The response times on an online computer terminal have approximately a

gamma distribution with mean four seconds and variance eight seconds2.
a. Use Tchebysheff’s theorem to give an interval that contains at least 75% of the
response times.
b. What is the actual probability of observing a response time in the interval you
obtained in part (a)?
 

186.

The weekly amount of downtime Y (in hours) for an industrial machine has

approximately a gamma distribution with α = 3 and β = 2. The loss L (in dollars) to the
industrial operation as a result of this downtime is given by L = 30Y + 2Y 2.
a. Find the expected value and variance of L.
 

187.

Suppose that Y has a gamma distribution with parameters α and β.

a. If a is any positive or negative value such that α + a > 0, show that
E(Ya) = βa(α + a)/(α)
b. Why did your answer in part (a) require that α + a > 0?
c. Show that, with a = 1, the result in part (a) gives E(Y ) = αβ.
d. Use the result in part (a) to give an expression for E(√Y ). What do you need to
assume about α?
e. Use the result in part (a) to give an expression for E(1/Y ), E(1/ √Y ), and E(1/Y 2).
What do you need to assume about α in each case?
 

188.

A gasoline wholesale distributor has bulk storage tanks that hold fixed supplies

and are filled every Monday. Of interest to the wholesaler is the proportion of this
supply that is sold during the week. Over many weeks of observation, the distributor
found that this proportion could be modeled by a beta distribution with α = 4 and β =
2. Find the probability that the wholesaler will sell at least 90% of her stock in a given
week.
 

189.

The relative humidity Y , when measured at a location, has a probability

density function given following. Find the value of k that makes f (y) a density
function.

 

190.

The percentage of impurities per batch in a chemical product is a random

variable Y with density function

Find the mean and variance of the percentage of impurities in a randomly selected batch of
the chemical.
 

191.

Verify that if Y has a beta distribution with α = β = 1, then Y has a uniform

distribution over (0, 1). That is, the uniform distribution over the interval (0, 1) is a
special case of a beta distribution.
 

192.

During an eight-hour shift, the proportion of time Y that a sheet-metal

stamping machine is down for maintenance or repairs has a beta distribution with α =
1 and β = 2. That is,

a. The cost (in hundreds of dollars) of this downtime, due to lost production and cost
of maintenance and repair, is given by C = 10 + 20Y + 4Y2. Find the mean and variance of C.
b. Find an interval for which the probability that C will lie within it is at least .75.

193.

Errors in measuring the time of arrival of a wave front from an acoustic source

sometimes have an approximate beta distribution. Suppose that these errors, measured
in microseconds, have approximately a beta distribution with α = 1 and β = 2.
a. What is the probability that the measurement error in a randomly selected instance is
less than .5 μs?
b. Give the mean and standard deviation of the measurement errors.
 

194.

The proportion of time per day that all checkout counters in a supermarket are

busy is a random variable Y with a density function given by
a. Find the value of c that makes f (y) a probability density function.
b. Find E(Y ). (Use what you have learned about the beta-type distribution. )
c. Calculate the standard deviation of Y .
 

195.

Find μk for the uniform random variable with θ1 = 0 and θ2 = θ for k=1,2,3.

196.

A machine used to fill cereal boxes dispenses, on the average, μ ounces per

box. The manufacturer wants the actual ounces dispensed Y to be within 1 ounce of μ
at least 75% of the time. What is the largest value of σ, the standard deviation of Y ,
that can be tolerated if the manufacturer’s objectives are to be met?
 

197.

Find P(|Y − μ| ≤ 2σ) for the uniform random variable. Compare with the

corresponding probabilistic statements given by Tchebysheff’s theorem and the
empirical rule.
 